# Get to know me & my objectives

Natural intelligence is the product of complex biochemical machinery that has been optimised by millions of years of evolution. Its proficiency remains unrivalled by any engineered system. If we exploit the biological constraints and organisation patterns of the mammalian brain, we can improve both our understanding of brain, cognition and behaviour and our ability to design more sophisticated and efficient information processing systems. 

My research aims to synthesise knowledge of the brain's electrochemical machinery and apply these principles to study cognitive information processing. In particular, I focus on three main complementary aspects: **architecture** (explore the principles of compartmentalisation, modularity and hierarchical specialisation), **learning** (explicitly incorporate insights from synaptic and neuronal biophysics in the expression and induction of activity-dependent plasticity) and **cognitive processing** (establish and explore improved and standardised assessments of cognitive function, applicable to a variety of model systems and directly comparable with human performance).

a) **cognitive processing**  
Having studied cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychology, I often find it difficult to reconcile the types of functional evaluations performed on artificial learning systems (often at the level of perception and action) with the complex cognitive computations an intelligent agent encounters in everyday life. As such, one primary objective of mine is to devise tasks and performance metrics that are explicitly derived from behavioral and cognitive psychology.

b) **architecture**
Neocortical organisation exhibits spatially ordered inhomogeneities, following gradients which correlate with the complexity of the computations involved. These properties are expressed (robustly and consistently) across multiple circuit features and reflect an evolutionary optimisation process. Focusing on structural components (cyto- and myelo-architecture), it is important to exploit the layered structure and input/output relations of cortical columns, often considered a generic processing unit (akin to an FPGA). This requires a better understanding of the contributions and properties of different cell types (with different response profiles and different morphological features), the role of modular connectivity (both within and between columns) as well as the effects of compartmentalisation of synaptic inputs (across different dendrites in a single neuron or across groups of neurons).

c) **learning**
Studying synaptic and neuronal biophysics, it becomes clear that the brain learns by fundamentally different principles from those employed in modern artificial learning systems. A central part of my research (and one which I'm particularly invested in) aims to understand the induction and expression of long-term learning and memory in the brain by explicitly accounting for its dedicated and specialised molecular machinery. Systematic variations in molecular composition across the cortex further entail that different areas of the brain learn following different rules (or different parameterizations of a common algorithm). 

My scientific interests have always had a central role in my life. After all, these topics refer to everything we are and everything we do. We are mechanistic electrochemical machines or, as Sir Francis Crick stated, "we are nothing but a pack of neurons". Coming to terms with these notions is, I believe, fundamental to understand our nature, our place in the natural world and guide our rational minds and decision-making processes. Ultimately, it is a fundamental path to living a truly human life. If this knowledge could effectively permeate society, we would live in a very different world. So, as a politically and socially conscious individual, I am also very keen on engaging with various domains of (non-academic) society through various means. 

Beyond neuroscience and, on a more personal note, I happily live in Nijmegen, Netherlands with my partner Rita, our baby boy Liam and our dog Alaska. When we are not changing diapers, rocking the newborn to sleep or walking the dog, we enjoy travelling and wandering the world. Music and entertainment (movies and TV series) also play an important role in our free time. I play the guitar and used to produce music (not so much in recent years, due to time constraints). In the last couple of months, however, sleeping has become our favourite hobby since we don't really get much of it at night.

I am always open and enthusiastic about new projects and ideas so, if any of my interests and research topics mentioned above resonate with you, feel free to reach out [renato.duarte@donders.ru.nl](mailto:renato.duarte@donders.ru.nl).
